Title: Analysis of carbon emissions from land cover change during 2000 to 2020 in Shandong Province, China

Abstract: Land cover change affects the carbon emissions of ecosystems in some way. The qualitative and quantitative understanding of carbon emissions from human activities (e.g., land cover change, industrial production, etc.) is highly significant for realizing the objective of carbon neutrality. Therefore, this paper used GlobeLand30 land cover maps, annual average normalised difference vegetation index (NDVI) data, annual average net ecosystem productivity (NEP) data and statistical yearbook data from 2000 to 2020 to explore the relationship between land cover change and carbon emissions. Specifically, it included land cover change, carbon storage changes influenced by land cover change, spatial and temporal analysis of carbon sources and sinks, land use intensity change and anthropogenic carbon emissions. The results of the study show that the main land cover changes in Shandong province during 2000-2020 was cultivated land conversion to artificial surfaces. Among them, the area of cultivated land converted to artificial surfaces from 2000 to 2010 was 4930.62 km 2 , and the proportion of cultivated land converted to artificial surfaces from 2010 to 2020 was as high as 78.35%. The total carbon stock of vegetation affected by land cover change decreased by 463.96 × 10 4 t and 193.50 × 10 4 t in 2000-2010 and 2010-2020 respectively. The spatial and temporal distribution of carbon sources and sinks differed more markedly from 2000 to 2020, and land use intensity changes in Shandong Province showed an upward trend. Of the total energy production, industry has the largest energy consumption, followed closely by total energy consumption in transportation, storage and postal services.
Phenomena such as global warming, melting glaciers, rising sea levels and hazy weather indicate that climate change brought about by the greenhouse effect is seriously affecting the future survival of mankind 1-3 . The Earth's climate is witnessing changes due to the influence of various factors. In recent years, global warming has become a hot issue for research. Emissions of greenhouse gases, e.g., carbon dioxide (CO 2 ) emissions, are regarded as a major contributor to global warming 4-6 . Studies have shown that the global average surface temperature has increased by 0.74 °C since the last century 7 , and atmospheric CO 2 concentrations have increased by up to 1.9 ppm per year 8 . The Global Carbon Budget Project shows that emissions of fossil CO 2 will increase by 0.5% in 2019, with emissions falling in the US and EU28 and increasing in China, India and the rest of the world 9 . With increasing levels of urbanisation and industrialisation, human activities are emitting large amounts of CO 2 into the atmosphere. Of these, land cover change is an important contributor to carbon emissions, making up roughly one-third of the carbon emissions generated by human activities from the industrial revolution 10 , contributing to increasing concentrations of CO 2 . Therefore, the study of the interrelationship between land cover change and carbon emissions is of great importance to further reduce carbon emissions.
The implementation of the reform and opening-up policy has led to a significant acceleration of urbanisation in China, most notably the dramatic expansion of artificial surfaces. Land cover change, energy consumption and other related human activities are the sources of carbon emissions and account for a relatively large share. Rapid economic development and high urbanisation levels in China's cities are hotspots for studying carbon emissions caused by land cover change. For example, Deng et al. analysed the influence of expanding construction land on carbon emissions related to energy in China and its provinces from 2001 to 2011 11 . Lu et al. explored the development process and characteristics of regional differences in carbon emissions from agricultural land in 31
