Title: Land use land cover change and the resilience of social-ecological systems in a sub-region in South west Cameroon

Abstract: LULCC and magnitude of impact of the drivers and predictors of LULCC in the sub-region by engag-| ing 25 stakeholders in a focus group survey. Other cultivated areas of cropland, built-up, oil palm, and banana plantation covers increased by 21,360 ha (10.5%), 3152 ha (1.6%), 5721 ha (2.8%), and 1823 ha (0.9%), while dense forest, rubber and tea plantation covers decreased by -44,945 ha (-22.1%), -15,557 ha (-7.7%), and -110 ha (-0.1%), respectively, from 1986 to 2018. Most of the deforestation and LULCC was caused by expansion of other cultivated areas of cropland by smallholders, contrary to the widely publicised narrative of agro-industrial and built-up areas expansion. The spatial pattern of LULCC showed that expansion of other cultivated areas of cropland and agro-industrial plantations were highest in the north and east zones, respectively, while expansion of builtup areas and decrease in agro-industrial plantation covers were highest in the central, south and western coastal zones of Fako division. The variations in the spatial patterns of LULCC between the sub-divisions are attributed to differences in rates of population growth and urbanisation, topography, size of farming population, proportion of cultivable land, socioeconomic opportunities, and strength and resilience of Abstract The old paradigm of horizontal expansion of agricultural land and built-up areas over highland and lowland ecosystems remains highly prevalent in Cameroon, causing significant changes in LULC and undermining the resilience and sustainability of social-ecological systems. We analysed satellite imagery of 1986 and 2018 to examine the extent and spatial patterns of LULCC in Fako sub-region of Cameroon. In addition, we explored the likelihood of Highlights • Most of the deforestation and LULCC was caused by expansion of other cultivated areas of cropland by smallholders, contrary to the widely publicised narrative of agro-industrial plantation and built-up area expansion from 1986 to 2018. • Dense forest and rubber plantation covers decreased, while oil palm and banana plantation covers increased, owing to local economics and increase in local and international palm oil demand. • Spatial patterns of change in LULC classes were highly variable within the sub-region, but common temporal trends in LULCC were observed on the most part. • Differences in biophysical and socio-economic factors explained the variability in the spatial patterns of LULCC among sub-divisions. • Changes in LULC decreased with elevation, but increased with nearness to the sea and national road networks.
