Title: Spatial relationship between land-use/land-cover change and land surface temperature in the Dongting Lake area, china

Abstract: the Dongting Lake area (china) is a climate change-sensitive and ecologically fragile area and plays a crucial role in the regulation of the regional climate. in recent decades, rapid social and economic development has led to increased land use/land cover (LULc) changes in the Dongting Lake area, which affect the surface energy balance and hydrological processes. Its contemporary variability under climate change remains highly uncertain. therefore, we retrieved the Land surface temperature (LSt) from the Landsat 7 data and explored its relationship with the LULC types. The results showed that LST is significantly affected by surface type. LST varied significantly across LULC types, with higher LSTs in built-up land, reed beach land, forest land, and paddy fields than in water bodies, mud beaches, marshlands, and riparian forests. Water bodies play an important regulatory role in reducing LSt and mitigating thermal effects on the ground. The winter LST in the study area increased by approximately 3.5 °C, which may be related to the decrease in the area of Dongting Lake water bodies, water fields and reed flats after the Three Gorges Reservoir was impounded. Compared with the relationship between the nDVi, DeM, and distance from the water body, the negative correlation between the nDMi and LST was stronger and more stable and had the greatest effect on LST. These insights improve the understanding of the land change consequences on the temporal dynamics of LSt.
Land surface temperature (LST) is a reflection of the energy flow in the interactions between the land surface and atmosphere and between the land surface and biosphere. The change in LST is an intuitive regional climate response to global climate change and has important research significance in agriculture, hydrology, ecology, environment, climate, and biogeochemistry1 1-6 . LULC is the interface between the atmosphere and biosphere for material and energy exchange and has a clear influence on LST. Currently, a wide consensus has been reached on the influence of LULC change on regional climate through various processes, such as water and heat flux between land and air 7 , surface wind speed, and boundary layer turbulence8 
Although the use of meteorological data for regional climate change research has progressed, meteorological data are difficult to obtain, and data accuracy is dependent on the site and the scope of the investigation, resulting in difficulties in achieving large-scale and long-term research. Compared with traditional observation methods used at meteorological stations, monitoring LST with remote sensing offers the advantages of a wide observation range and strong spatial continuity. Thus, this monitoring has developed rapidly in thermal environment
