Title: Land-use change is associated with multi-century loss of elephant ecosystems in Asia

Abstract: Understanding historic patterns of land use and land cover change across large temporal and spatial scales is critical for developing effective biodiversity conservation management and policy. We quantify the extent and fragmentation of suitable habitat across the continental range of Asian elephants (Elephas maximus) based on present-day occurrence data and land-use variables between 850 and 2015 A.D. We found that following centuries of relative stability, over 64% (3.36 million km 2 ) of suitable elephant habitat across Asia was lost since the year 1700, coincident with colonial-era land-use practices in South Asia and subsequent agricultural intensification in Southeast Asia. Average patch size dropped 83% from approximately 99,000-16,000 km 2 and the area occupied by the largest patch decreased 83% from ~ 4 million km 2 (45% of area) to 54,000 km 2 (~ 7.5% of area). Whereas 100% of the area within 100 km of the current elephant range could have been considered suitable habitat in the year 1700, over half was unsuitable by 2015, driving potential conflict with people. These losses reflect long-term decline of non-forested ecosystems, exceeding estimates of deforestation within this century. Societies must consider ecological histories in addition to proximate threats to develop more just and sustainable land-use and conservation strategies.
Habitat loss and degradation are leading drivers of terrestrial biodiversity loss worldwide 1-3 . An estimated three quarters of the Earth's land surface has been significantly altered by human activities 4 . Historic reasons include conversion for cultivation and settlement, reflecting both local and global socioeconomic drivers of land-use and land-cover (LULC) change 
Although LULC trends in recent decades may be inferred from satellite imagery and statistical data 2,7,8 , it remains difficult to assess the impact of long-term anthropogenic processes on particular species or ecosystems. Human-induced changes are known to restrict the ranges of many terrestrial mammal species 9,10 but historical records on population abundance and distribution are often limited for many taxa, complicating efforts to assess impacts over longer periods. Nevertheless, longer historical perspectives are necessary to appreciate the true magnitude of changes to threatened ecosystems. For example, historical studies have influenced conservation policies related to remnant prairies in Oregon, wetlands in Iowa, and forests in Germany, at times challenging standard management practices 11 .
One way to overcome these data gaps is through ecological niche models (see also species distribution models), in which species occurrence data, together with environmental covariates, are used to infer possible occurrence or suitable habitat at a different area or time
